Approaches for reverse-string (#657)
exercism/bash: exercises/practice/reverse-string/.articles/performance/content.md

# Performance

We usually don't care that much about performance with shell scripts.

> But when we can avoid doing something we know is slow, especially if this slow thing is done repeatedly inside a loop, avoid it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we know something is slow, we can avoid it.
This matters much more when the operation is done inside loop.
```

## String length is slow

Obtaining the length of a string is a surprisingly expensive operation in bash.
With large strings and/or large loops, performance can be significantly impacted.
Storing the length in a variable helps significantly.

Demonstrating an empty loop, iterating over the string indices.

```bash
$ printf -v string "%32767s" foo
$ time for ((i = 0; i < ${#string}; i++)); do true; done

real    0m1.448s
user    0m1.443s
sys     0m0.005s

$ len=${#string}
$ time for ((i = 0; i < len; i++)); do :; done

real    0m0.159s
user    0m0.159s
sys     0m0.000s
```

> If we can loop backwards, don't even need the variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we can loop backwards, we don't even need to save the length to a variable.
```

> We even get a tiny improvement since bash does not need to access the variable contents for each iteration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We get a tiny improvement since bash does not need to access the variable contents for each iteration.
```

```bash
$ time for ((i = ${#string} - 1; i >= 0; i--)); do true; done

real    0m0.151s
user    0m0.151s
sys     0m0.000s
```

## Substrings can be slow

> Whether we go backwards or forwards, we are still having to extract the character at the given index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether we go backwards or forwards, we still have to extract the character at the given index.
```

Re-using our 32,767 character string:

```bash
$ time for ((i = 0; i < len; i++)); do
    char="${string:i:1}"

>   done

Reviewer: ```suggestion
done
```

Author: I'll leave it as is.

real    0m9.188s
user    0m9.188s
sys     0m0.000s
```

That's 9 seconds just to read each character.
What if we can iterate over the characters directly?
We can, with a while-read loop.

## While-Read loops

We'll _redirect_ the string into loop so `read` can extract one character at a time.

```bash
$ time while IFS= read -d "" -r -n 1 char; do
    true
  done < <(printf "%s" "$string")

real    0m0.336s
user    0m0.276s
sys     0m0.060s
```

There's a 27x improvement.

What are we doing there?

- `< <(printf "%s" "%string)` is redirecting (`<`) a [process substitution][process-subst] (`<(...)`).
    We could use a [here-string][here-string] (`<<< "$string"`), but that appends a newline.

>     Using `printf` like that redirects the string exactly as it is.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Using `printf` outputs the string without adding a trailing newline.
```

> - `IFS= read -d "" -r -n 1 char` OK there's a lot going on there with this [`read` command][read]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `IFS= read -d "" -r -n 1 char` there's a lot going on there with this [`read` command][read]:
```

Author: I'll use
```markdown
- `IFS= read -d "" -r -n 1 char`: There's a lot going on there with this [`read` command][read].
```

    - `IFS=`: Normally, `read` will trim leading and trailing whitespace.
        More exactly, characters in `$IFS` are removed from the start and end of the text that `read` captures.
        By default, IFS contains space, tab and newline.
        Our goal is to read each character of the string, including whitespace.

>         That empty assignment assigns the empty string to IFS _only for the duration of the `read` command_ so that whitespace characters are not treated specially.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        The empty assignment assigns the empty string to IFS _only for the duration of the `read` command_ so that whitespace characters are not treated specially.
```
